Document limit pushdown in the dev guide (#13021)
trinodb/trino: docs/src/main/sphinx/develop/connectors.rst

Note that data modification also requires implementing
a :ref:`connector-page-sink-provider`.

> When a ``SELECT`` query is being executed, and it contains specific clauses,

Reviewer: Probably add a heading for `Pushdown`.

Author: Can we add it when there's going to be at least one other type of pushdown documented?

the engine can try pushing down some of them into the connector, by calling
one of the following methods of the ``ConnectorMetadata`` service:

> * ``applyLimit`` for the ``LIMIT`` clause, or ``applyTopN`` when ``ORDER BY``
>   is also present

Reviewer: nit

```suggestion
* ``applyLimit`` for the ``LIMIT`` clause, or ``applyTopN`` when both ``LIMIT`` and ``ORDER BY``
  clauses are present
```

Author: topN would be called when only `ORDER BY` is present

* ``applyFilter`` for the ``WHERE`` clause
* ``applyProjection`` for expressions in the ``SELECT`` clause
* ``applySample`` for the ``TABLESAMPLE`` clause
* ``applyAggregation`` for the ``GROUP BY`` clause
* ``applyJoin`` for the different types of the ``JOIN`` clause

> * ``applyTableFunction`` for the ``TABLE ()`` clause

Reviewer: IIRC `TABLE ( )` is not PTF. It's just syntax sugar to wrap something in `SELECT * FROM`. e.g. try `TABLE orders` in trino-cli and it'll execute `SELECT * FROM orders`.

Or maybe I'm confused.

Author: I thought adding parenthesis would be enough, but I see how that can be confusing. BTW `TABLE <name>` doesn't work for subqueries:
```
trino:v2> table (select 1);
Query 20220725_063410_00002_jik9j failed: line 1:7: mismatched input '('. Expecting: <identifier>
table (select 1)
```

How about something like this?
```suggestion
* ``applyTableFunction`` for the ``TABLE ()`` table function clause
```

Reviewer: Thanks for explaining. Your suggestion definitely seems better.

> * ``applyTableScanRedirect``

Reviewer: missing description

Author: I didn't know how to describe it. Any suggestions?

Reviewer: Maybe `to redirect table scans to a different connector`?

Author: Thanks, done!

> Connectors can indicate whether they don't support a particular pushdown
> or that the action had no effect by returning ``Optional.empty()``. Connectors

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Connectors can indicate that they don't support a particular pushdown
or that the action had no effect by returning ``Optional.empty()``. Connectors
```

should expect these methods to be called multiple times during the optimization
of a given query.

.. warning::

  It's critical for connectors to return ``Optional.empty()`` if calling
  this method has no effect for that invocation, even if the connector generally
  supports a particular pushdown. Doing otherwise can cause the optimizer
  to loop indefinitely.

Otherwise, these methods return a result object containing the connectors
table handle. The connector can store any kind of information in the table
handle, as it will be passed later to other services it implements, like

> the record set or page source provider.

Reviewer: nit: Use class names (or links to sections which explain them).

Limit and TopN pushdown
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

When a ``SELECT`` query contains a :ref:`limit-clause`, the engine will try to
push down the limit into the connector. If there's no ``ORDER BY`` clause,
the ``applyLimit`` method of the connector metadata service will be called,
and the connector can return results in an arbitrary order.

> Otherwise, the engine will call ``applyTopN``.

Reviewer: Otherwise != `LIMIT + ORDER BY`. We can be more explicit.

If the connector could benefit from the information but can't guarantee that it
will be able to produce fewer rows than the provided limit, it should return
a non-empty result containing a new handle for the derived table and

> the "limit guaranteed" or "topN guaranteed" flag set to false.

Reviewer: using field names would probably make this more obvious.

If the connector can guarantee it will produce fewer rows than the provided
limit, it should return a non-empty result with the "limit guaranteed" or
"topN guaranteed" flag set to true.

.. note::

  The ``applyTopN`` is the only method that receives sort items from the

>   ``ORDER BY`` clause. It will be called even if there's no ``LIMIT`` clause.

Reviewer: This seems to conflict what we mentioned earlier in the list of `applyXXX` methods. We say `applyTopN` is called when query has both `ORDER BY` and `LIMIT` clauses. Here we say it is called even if no `LIMIT` is present.

Author: I fixed the earlier occurrences. This paragraph is correct.

In an SQL query, the ``ORDER BY`` section can include any column with any order.
But the data source for the connector might only support limited combinations.
Plugin authors have to decide if the connector should ignore the pushdown,
return all the data and let the engine sort it, or throw an exception
to inform the user that particular order is not supported, if fetching all

> the data would be too expensive or time consuming. When throwing

Reviewer: Do we have any connectors which already do this today?

Author: I do, https://github.com/nineinchnick/trino-rest

Reviewer: Thanks. However all error codes in StandardErrorCodes are supposed to be thrown by engine. Connectors should define their own. At-least that's my understanding from some previous PRs.

cc: @martint would know better.

Author: Sure, I can describe how to create custom exceptions. I was planning on adding a whole paragraph/section about error handling but in another PR.

Author: @martint WDYT?

Reviewer 2: > However all error codes in StandardErrorCodes are supposed to be thrown by engine

If an error is covered by one of the entries in StandardErrorCodes, connectors should use it. They should only define custom codes for non-standard (i.e., connector-specific) errors.

Author: So I'll leave it as is. We'll have more opportunities to mention connector-specific errors.

an exception, use the ``TrinoException`` class with the ``INVALID_ORDER_BY``
error code and an actionable message, to let users know how to write a valid
query.

.. _connector-split-manager:

ConnectorSplitManager

> ---------------------

Reviewer: Everything here and below could be separate commit.

Author: It's related :-)

Note that data modification also requires implementing
a :ref:`connector-page-sink-provider`.

When a ``SELECT`` query is being executed, and it contains specific clauses,
the engine can try pushing down some of them into the connector, by calling
one of the following methods of the ``ConnectorMetadata`` service:

* ``applyLimit`` for the ``LIMIT`` clause, if ``ORDER BY`` is not present,
  or ``applyTopN`` when ``ORDER BY`` is present
* ``applyFilter`` for the ``WHERE`` clause
* ``applyProjection`` for expressions in the ``SELECT`` clause
* ``applySample`` for the ``TABLESAMPLE`` clause
* ``applyAggregation`` for the ``GROUP BY`` clause
* ``applyJoin`` for the different types of the ``JOIN`` clause
* ``applyTableFunction`` for the ``TABLE ()`` table function clause

> * ``applyTableScanRedirect`` to redirect table scans to a different connector

Reviewer 2: The applyXXX methods may or may not correspond to SQL clauses. They are related to operations in the plan IR, not directly with SQL language features. For instance, both the HAVING and WHERE clause get implemented as a Filter in the IR. In some cases, filters can be synthesized from other SQL constructs (e.g., expression in the JOIN clause could be pushed down as filters and eventually make it to connectors via applyFilter).

Therefore, it's more correct and accurate to describe these operations in terms of what plan structures they apply to.

Author: I reworded this section to mention the IR. I also removed these example clauses, so we could explain them better later in subsections as we do here for limit and top-N.

Connectors can indicate that they don't support a particular pushdown or that
the action had no effect by returning ``Optional.empty()``. Connectors should
expect these methods to be called multiple times during the optimization of
a given query.

.. warning::

  It's critical for connectors to return ``Optional.empty()`` if calling
  this method has no effect for that invocation, even if the connector generally
  supports a particular pushdown. Doing otherwise can cause the optimizer
  to loop indefinitely.

Otherwise, these methods return a result object containing the connectors
table handle. The connector can store any kind of information in the table
handle, as it will be passed later to other services it implements, like
the ``ConnectorRecordSetProvider`` or ``ConnectorPageSourceProvider``.

Limit and TopN pushdown
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

When a ``SELECT`` query contains a :ref:`limit-clause`, the engine will try to
push down the limit into the connector. If there's no ``ORDER BY`` clause,
the ``applyLimit`` method of the connector metadata service will be called,
and the connector can return results in an arbitrary order.

> When there's a ``ORDER BY`` clause present, the engine will call ``applyTopN``.

Reviewer 2: This needs to be described in terms of IR elements, not SQL-level constructs

Author: Can you give one example? I can only think about something like `When the plan contains operations related to a ... clause` but it seems too verbose to use too often.

Reviewer 2: E.g.,

> When the plan contains a `Sort` operation followed by a `Limit` operation, the engine will call `applyTopN`

Author: Thank you so much. I redacted this section. PTAL as it still might be phrased better, but I now feel more confident in writing about pushdowns.

Note that data modification also requires implementing
a :ref:`connector-page-sink-provider`.

When Trino receives a ``SELECT`` query, it parses it into an Intermediate
Representation (IR). Then, during optimization, it checks if connectors
can handle operations related to SQL clauses by calling one of the following
methods of the ``ConnectorMetadata`` service:

* ``applyLimit``
* ``applyTopN``
* ``applyFilter``
* ``applyProjection``
* ``applySample``
* ``applyAggregation``
* ``applyJoin``
* ``applyTableFunction``
* ``applyTableScanRedirect``

Connectors can indicate that they don't support a particular pushdown or that
the action had no effect by returning ``Optional.empty()``. Connectors should
expect these methods to be called multiple times during the optimization of
a given query.

.. warning::

  It's critical for connectors to return ``Optional.empty()`` if calling
  this method has no effect for that invocation, even if the connector generally
  supports a particular pushdown. Doing otherwise can cause the optimizer
  to loop indefinitely.

> Otherwise, these methods return a result object containing the connectors

Reviewer 2: > the connectors table handle

It's actually a new table handle representing the virtual table derived from applying the operation (filter, project, limit, etc) to the table produced by the table scan node.

table handle. The connector can store any kind of information in the table
handle, as it's passed to other services it implements, like
the ``ConnectorRecordSetProvider`` or ``ConnectorPageSourceProvider``.

Limit and top-N pushdown
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

When executing a ``SELECT`` query with ``LIMIT`` or ``ORDER BY`` clauses,
the query plan may contain a ``Sort`` or ``Limit`` operations.

When the plan contains a ``Sort`` operation, the engine

> tries to push down the limit into the connector by calling the ``applyTopN``

Reviewer 2: This is only when there is a Sort *and* a Limit (they first get converted to a TopN IR operation). A Sort alone would not result in a call to applyTopN

Author: How does that map to a query like `SELECT * FROM a ORDER BY b`? Would there be a `Limit` operation with a max value or it wouldn't push down the order at all?

Reviewer: Order won't be pushed.

Author: Thanks. I can't explain why I thought this works differently. I checked the tests in my custom connectors and I couldn't find any with only `ORDER BY`. I guess this is why we need to have this in the developer guide :-)

method of the connector metadata service. If there's no ``Sort`` operation, but
only a ``Limit``, the ``applyLimit`` method is called, and the connector can
return results in an arbitrary order.

If the connector could benefit from the information passed to these methods but
can't guarantee that it's be able to produce fewer rows than the provided
limit, it should return a non-empty result containing a new handle for the
derived table and the ``limitGuaranteed`` (in ``LimitApplicationResult``) or
``topNGuaranteed`` (in ``TopNApplicationResult``) flag set to false.

If the connector can guarantee to produce fewer rows than the provided
limit, it should return a non-empty result with the "limit guaranteed" or
"topN guaranteed" flag set to true.

.. note::

  The ``applyTopN`` is the only method that receives sort items from the

>   ``Sort`` operation. It's called even if there's no ``Limit`` operation.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure I understand what this is trying to convey.

Author: I removed the last sentence. I found it surprising that there's no `applySort` and I did not expect `applyTopN` to be the only way of pushing down ordering. Do you think it's worth keeping this note?

.. _connector-record-set-provider:

ConnectorRecordSetProvider
--------------------------

Given a split, a table handle, and a list of columns, the record set provider is
responsible for delivering data to the Trino execution engine.

It creates a ``RecordSet``, which in turn creates a ``RecordCursor`` that's used
by Trino to read the column values for each row. It can use any additional

> information stored in the table handle object by methods the metadata service

Reviewer 2: The information can be stored in the table handle or elsewhere. Conceptually, a "table handle" is just an opaque handle to a virtual table. It could be implemented as an id into a remote distributed store that keeps the details, or kept inline inside the handle itself.

It's better to think of the table handle as generalized identifier or key.

Author: Thanks! I reworded it.
